# Cookies

## Goals

* Know what **statelessness** means.
* Know how a cookie can store data on the client.

## HTTP is stateless

HTTP is **stateless**; each request that a client makes is independent
of every other request. A stateless protocol is a communications
protocol that treats each request as an independent transaction that
is unrelated to any previous request so that the communication
consists of independent pairs of requests and responses.

Okay, but what the hell does that mean? Let's take an example: say we
login to amazon, then fetch our personal wishlist. HTTP itself doesn't
build in a way to tie the first request (the login) to the second
request (fetch the wishlist). That means that, without additional
work, our web app won't understand whose wishlist to display.

This is the problem that cookies were invented to solve.

Stateless protocols allow server software to be written more simply
and with fewer bugs. They can also make certain intelligent
optimizations that let the web service operator scale up his or her machines
more easily. These points aren't essential for us to dive into right
now, but you should know that the simplicity of HTTP and other
stateless protocols is part of what makes them so powerful.

## Cookies

Okay, statelessness is a good thing, but how do we solve our problem?

Of course, it starts when we post login credentials to the server. We
may exchange a request-response with `www.amazon.com` like this:

```
Request:
    POST /session HTTP/1.1
    Host: amazon.com

    user=ruggeri&password=gizmo_is_great

Response:
    HTTP/1.1 302
    Set-Cookie: user=ruggeri; session_token=135792468
    Location: http://www.amazon.com/
```

Here we post our credentials to the Amazon server. Amazon sends us the
response: the 302 tells the browser to make a new request for the
amazon home page. But the response also has a `Set-Cookie` header line.

The `Set-Cookie` line is telling the client (our web browser) to save
some state in the browser: namely, the logged in Amazon user and a
randomly generated session token (we'll see why in a minute). The
browser is expected to upload this **cookie** as part of each
subsequent request to `www.amazon.com`.

```
GET /wishlist http/1.1
Host: www.amazon.com
Cookie: user=ruggeri; session_token=135792468
```

The way the server can know this new request is being made by user
`ruggeri` is through the cookie. It can verify the user is who they
claim to be and that the cookie is not **faked**. When the user
submitted the credentials, the session token set in the cookie would
also be stored in the server's database. On future requests, we
compare the session token for the specified user with the session
token uploaded in the cookie.

Note that the server doesn't have any other way to tie together the
login request and the wishlist request. Without the cookie, the server
would have no way to differentiate this request from user `ruggeri`
from another request from user `patel`.

Once a cookie is set, it continues to be uploaded to the server on
every request until it **expires** or is cleared out by the user. It
is common to set the cookie to expire on a date far in the future so
that it continues to be uploaded. This is called a **permanent
cookie**. A permanent cookie is not truly permanent;
[all things must pass][all-things-must-pass]. However, it does live
for a very long time, and since a cookie can be renewed by being set
again, it can live practically forever.

Another common option is not to set an expiration date at all. In this
case, the cookie will be deleted when the web browser closes. This is
called a **session cookie**.

[all-things-must-pass]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_Things_Must_Pass

## Another example: shopping carts

Let's consider a second example. Say a logged in user (`ruggeri`) is
navigating `www.amazon.com` and wants to add items to his shopping
cart. Each shopping cart request might trigger a POST request to the
server; the server would then update its database to reflect that user
`ruggeri` has added another item to his shopping cart. When user
`ruggeri` checks out, the server queries the database to check the
items in his cart, and computes the price.

What about a marketplace that wants to allow users to add items to
their carts without having logged in yet? Maybe it is only at checkout
that the user logs in. Or maybe they never log in, and just provide
credit-card information at checkout.

Here the users are anonymous: the server doesn't have a username for
this user. For that reason, it wouldn't be easy to record in the
database that user X has added an item to their cart, since there is
no username for X.

One solution would be to store the shopping cart in the user's
cookie. Each time the user makes a request, they'll upload the cookie
containing the shopping cart. Whenever they add an item, the server
will send the shopping cart cookie back, having first appended one
more item to it.

### Advantages and disadvantages

There are a few additional advantages to each approach. The approach
of storing state on the server means that the user can use different
devices (maybe a computer and a phone) to use the service, and still
access the cart across machines. Also, if the cookies get cleared,
they don't lose the items in their cart.

The information stored in a cart is very small: probably just the id
numbers of the items. It won't hurt to upload them on every
request. If there were more data to store (for instance, images), then
it would slow down the interaction with the website to upload the
cookie every time. Cookies have reasonable limitations to how much
data they can hold; usually 4kB. But if we wanted to store more than
this amount of data, we need to do this server-side.

There are advantages to storing the cart in the cookie. It may be
simpler to just have the client store the cart in cookies. We don't
have to store the cart in the database, clean up and remove old carts
that users don't ever check out, etc. Depending on how interactive the
site is, we may not have to set up a database at all.

Another consideration is that the web application may not be able to
search data stored in the cookie. Say we wanted to run a query to ask
what items were stored in all users' carts currently. With the
cookie-based architecture, we haven't stored that information on our
servers; it exists in the cookies saved on our users' computers, which
we can't get access to. We only get access to that data when the
user's browser makes a web request.

One last point: any information that must be reliably persisted must
not be stored in a cookie. People clear cookies all the time, so you
can't count on the data you save in the cookie being around later. And
users can edit or fake the cookies, so you can't necessarily trust
that the data won't be modified by a malicious user.

## Sessions

Information like the logged in username or the items in a cart is
called **session data**. Session data is part of the context in which
future requests are interpreted. For instance, when a client makes a
GET request for a wishlist, the context includes the currently logged
in user. The session data, in aggregate, is called the **session**.

**Session** is a concept; cookies are the way that concept is
implemented. When we start working with Rails, we'll see the word
session more frequently than cookie; that's because Rails is trying to
be flexible about whether it uses cookies or some other means to
implement a session (e.g., by using the database, as described above).
